Ownership migration guide (#1993)
port-labs/port-docs: docs/sso-rbac/rbac/migration.md

The resources that might be affected are:
- Blueprints
- Blueprint permissions (only if managed using IaC, GitOps or directly from the API)
- Actions
- Action permissions
- Automations
- Page permissions (only if managed using IaC, GitOps or directly from the API)
- Integration mappings
- Webhook mappings

Some of the resources will be migrated automatically, while others will require manual intervention.

## Prepare for migration
Before running the migration, you can you can use [this script](https://github.com/port-labs/script-examples/tree/main/users-and-teams-as-blueprints-migration-visibility-script) to check the affected resources and see if they need to be migrated manually.
The script will retrieve all affected resources and generate a report with the resources them needs to be migrated manually.
After downloading the script, follow the instructions in the README file to execute it.

:::info Security concerns
The script only queries the data from your portal, <b>it will not make any changes to your data</b>.  
The script is open source, you can review it before running it to see the implementation.
:::

### Migration report

> Running the script will output an `output/index.html` file that contains the report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running the script will output an `output/index.html` file that contains the report.  
```

The report is divided into two main sections: resources that will be migrated **automatically** and resources that will require **manual intervention**.

### Resources that will require manual intervention
This section includes resources that might be affected by the migration and will require manual intervention once the migration is triggered.
#### Calculation properties
<img src="/img/users-and-teams-migration/calculation-properties-to-be-reviewed.png" border='1px' />
Blueprints with calculation properties that based on the team meta property or the old teams relation identifier will be affected. The script will report all blueprints that have calculation properties based on those values.

> For example the current calculation property uses the old teams relation identifier that will be changed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following calculation property uses the old teams relation identifier that will be changed:
```

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json showLineNumbers
```

{
  ...
  "calculationProperties": {
    "calc": {
      "title": "calc",
      "calculation": ".relations.teams",
      "type": "array"
    }
  }
  ...
}
```

This change will <b>not be applied automatically</b>, you will need to review the blueprints and apply the changes manually.

#### Actions & Automations
<img src="/img/users-and-teams-migration/actions-and-automations-to-be-reviewed.png" border='1px' />
Actions and automations might be affected by the migration in two cases:

> 1. User Inputs: Actions might have advanced input configurations based on the team meta property value or the teams relation identifier that will be changed. This typically occurs when using the `jqQuery` configuration in user inputs. Because the team meta property value will be changed to `identifier` instead of `title`, the `jqQuery` configuration might break and need to be reviewed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **User Inputs**: actions might have advanced input configurations based on the team meta property value or the teams relation identifier that will be changed. This typically occurs when using the `jqQuery` configuration in user inputs. Because the team meta property value will be changed to `identifier` instead of `title`, the `jqQuery` configuration might break and need to be reviewed.
```

> 2. Mapping configurations: Actions and automations might have mapping configurations based on the team meta property value or the teams relation identifier that will be changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Mapping configurations**: actions and automations might have mapping configurations based on the team meta property value or the teams relation identifier that will be changed.
```

> 3. Use team-related fields in webhook bodies or URL parameters

Reviewer: not sure i understand this one

Author: If you use the team value in the webhook request body you are sending

The script will report all actions and automations that use the team meta property value or the teams relation identifier in their configuration.
This change will <b>not be applied automatically</b>. You will need to review them and apply the changes manually.

User inputs based on the team meta property value example:

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json showLineNumbers
```

{
  "userInputs": {
      "properties": {
        "service": {
          "type": "string",
          "format": "entity",
          "blueprint": "Service",
          "description": "The service to create",
          "visible": {
            "jqQuery": ".user.team | contains([\"My Team\"])"
          }
        },
      }
  }
}
```

Mapping values based on the team meta property value example:

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json showLineNumbers
```

{
  "mapping": {
    "entity": {
      "identifier": ".identifier",
      "team": ".relations.teams + [\"my_team\"] | unique"
    }
  }
}
```

#### Action dynamic permissions
<img src="/img/users-and-teams-migration/actions-dynamic-permissions-to-be-reviewed.png" border='1px' />
While explicit team permissions will be migrated to identifiers automatically as described in the [Permissions](#permissions) section, an action's dynamic permissions might have conditions based on the team meta property value or the teams relation identifier. These conditions might break and need to be reviewed.<br/>

> The script will report all actions that use the team meta property value or the teams relation identifier in their dynamic permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The script will report all actions that use the team meta property value or the teams relation identifier in their dynamic permissions.
```

> For example the current action permissions based on the team meta property value and might break:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following action permissions based on the team meta property value and might break:
```

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json showLineNumbers
```

        "teams": [],
        "policy": {
        "queries": {
          "search_entity": {
            "rules": [
              {
                "value": "service",
                "operator": "=",
                "property": "$blueprint"
              }
            ],
            "combinator": "and"
          }
        },
        "conditions": [
          ".results.team | length == 0"
        ]
      }
    }
}
```

This change will <b>not be applied automatically</b>, you will need to review the dynamic permissions and apply the changes manually.

#### Integration & Webhook mappings
<img src="/img/users-and-teams-migration/integrations-and-webhooks-mappings-to-be-reviewed.png" border='1px' />
Integration and webhook mappings ingesting data to the team meta property of entities might be affected. After the migration, the team meta property will expect team identifiers instead of titles, so the mapping for this value might break.<br/>
Mappings that manages with a `port.yaml` will appear also in the report since we can't know if they maps to the team meta property or not.<br/>
The script will report all integration and webhook mappings that ingest data to the team meta property.

> For example the current mapping:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, take the following mapping:
```

> ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml showLineNumbers
```

port:
  entity:
    mappings:
          identifier: .name
          title: .name

>           team: '"My Team"'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#highlight-next-line
          team: '"My Team"'
```

          blueprint: '"service"'
          properties:
            readme: file://README.md
            url: .html_url
            language: .language
```

> Tries to map the 'My Team' value to the team meta property so it will need to be changed to the identifier:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The team value `My Team` is the`title` of the team, it will need to be changed to the team's `identifier`:
Tries to map the 'My Team' value to the team meta property so it will need to be changed to the identifier:
```

> ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml showLineNumbers
```

port:
  entity:
    mappings:
          identifier: .name
          title: .name

>           team: '"my_team"'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#highlight-next-line
          team: '"my_team"'
```

          blueprint: '"service"'
          properties:
            readme: file://README.md
            url: .html_url
            language: .language
```
This change will <b>not be applied automatically</b>, you will need to review the integrations mapping and apply the changes manually.

#### Pages
<img src="/img/users-and-teams-migration/pages-to-be-reviewed.png" border='1px' />
Page widgets might have configurations based on the teams relations old identifier that will be changed during the migration. These configurations might break and needs to be reviewed. The script will report all pages that use the teams relations old identifier in their widget configurations.<br/>

> The main use case for this is adding the relation identifier to the `excludedFields` (excluded properties) configuration of a widget or in the `blueprintConfig` field. The blueprint config includes all filters, sorting, hidden and shown fields, and group-by fields of table widgets. If the old relation identifier is used in any of these properties, it will need to be changed to the new identifier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The main use case for this is adding the relation identifier to the `excludedFields` (excluded properties) configuration of a widget or in the `blueprintConfig` field. The blueprint config includes all filters, sorting, hidden and shown fields, and group-by fields of table widgets. If the old relation identifier is used in any of these properties, it will need to be changed to the new identifier.
```

This change will <b>not be applied automatically</b>. You will need to review the pages and apply the changes manually.

### Resources that will be migrated automatically
This section includes resources that will be migrated automatically once the migration is triggered.

#### Blueprints
<img src="/img/users-and-teams-migration/blueprints-to-be-migrated.png" border='1px' />
Besides calculation properties, all relevant blueprints will be migrated automatically to have the new ownership property. As described in the report, you can check which blueprints will be affected by the migration and what the changes will be.

> The migration rules are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The migration rules are:
```

> 1. Blueprints with entities that have `$team` value -> the ownership field will be set to `direct`.

Reviewer: indent code snippets that are under list items

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json showLineNumbers
```

// Direct ownership
{
  "identifier": "PackageVersion",
  "title": "Package Version",
  "ownership": {
	  "type": "Direct"
  }
  ...
}
```
2. Blueprints with team inheritance defined -> the ownership field will be set to `inherited` and the team inheritance definitions will be removed.

> For example the current blueprint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following blueprint:
```

```json
// Team inheritance
{
  "identifier": "PackageVersion",
  "title": "Package Version",
  "teamInheritance": {
	  "path": "my_service"
  }
  ...
}
```
Will be changed to:

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json showLineNumbers
```

// Inherited ownership
{
  "identifier": "PackageVersion",
  "title": "Package Version",
  "ownership": {
	  "type": "Inherited",
      "path": "my_service"
  }
  ...
}
```
3. Blueprints with a direct relation to the Team blueprint and team inheritance defined on top of this relation -> the relation will be removed and the ownership field will be set to `direct`. This change only relevant to organizations with the beta version enabled.

> For example the current blueprint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following blueprint:
```

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json showLineNumbers
```

// Team inheritance on top of direct relation
{
  "identifier": "PackageVersion",
  "title": "Package Version",
  "relations": {
    "teams": {
      "target": "_team",
      "many": true,
      "required": false
    }
  },
  "teamInheritance": {
    "path": "teams"
  }
  ...
}
```
Will be changed to:
```json
// Direct ownership
{
  "identifier": "PackageVersion",
  "title": "Package Version",
  "relations": {},
  "ownership": {
    "type": "Direct"
  }
  ...
}
```

While those changes will be applied automatically, if you manage blueprints using IaC, GitOps (Terraform, Pulumi, etc.) or directly by the API, you will need to apply the changes manually in your repository state.

#### Permissions
<img src="/img/users-and-teams-migration/permissions-to-be-migrated.png" border='1px' />
As the team meta property of entities will be changed from `title` to `identifier`, permissions with explicit team permissions will be migrated to use identifiers.
This change will be applied automatically for blueprints, actions, and page permissions.

> For example the current permissions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following permissions:
```

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json showLineNumbers
```

{
  "permissions": {
    "teams": ["My Team"]
  }
}
```
Will need to be changed to:

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json showLineNumbers
```

{
  "permissions": {
    "teams": ["my_team"]
  }
}
```

While those changes will be applied automatically, if you manage blueprints using IaC, GitOps (Terraform, Pulumi, etc.) or directly by the API, you will need to apply the changes manually in your repository state.

## Execute the migration

> Once you are ready and want to start the migration of management of users and teams as blueprints, send a POST request to a designated endpoint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you are ready to start the migration, send a POST request to a designated endpoint:
```

Its purpose is to guide you through the migration process to use the new behavior and manage users and teams using dedicated blueprints.
:::

## Major changes
The migration includes two major changes:
1. New blueprints to represent and manage users and teams (only for organizations that did not enable the beta feature).
2. Blueprint ownership is now defined using a new property, as described [here](/sso-rbac/rbac/as-blueprints#the-ownership-property).
3. The value of the `$team` property will be the entity's `identifier` (and not its `title` as it was before).

These changes will be applied once you trigger the migration. Once applied, some resources in your portal <b>might break</b>. 
The resources that might be affected are:
- Blueprints
- Blueprint permissions (only if managed using IaC, GitOps or directly from the API)
- Actions
- Action permissions
- Automations
- Page permissions (only if managed using IaC, GitOps or directly from the API)
- Integration mappings
- Webhook mappings

Some of the resources will be migrated automatically, while others will require manual intervention.

## Prepare for migration

> Before running the migration, you can you can use [this script](https://github.com/port-labs/script-examples/tree/main/users-and-teams-as-blueprints-migration-visibility-script) to check the affected resources and see if they need to be migrated manually. The script will retrieve all affected resources and generate a report.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before running the migration, you can use [this script](https://github.com/port-labs/script-examples/tree/main/users-and-teams-as-blueprints-migration-visibility-script) to check the affected resources and see if they need to be migrated manually. The script will retrieve all affected resources and generate a report.
```

---
sidebar_position: 4
---

# Migration
:::warning Migration relevance
This migration guide is relevant only for users who created their Port account **before** January 14, 2025.
Its purpose is to guide you through the migration process to the new mechanism to manage users and teams using dedicated blueprints.
:::

## Changes of the migration
The migration includes two major changes:
1. Blueprint ownership configuration as described [here](/sso-rbac/rbac/as-blueprints#the-ownership-property)
2. `$team` value of entities changed from title to identifier

These changes will be applied once to trigger the migration. Once applied, some resources in your portal <b>might break</b>.
The resources that might be affected are:

> - Blueprints (only if managed using IaC or GitOps)

Reviewer 3: Or used directly via the API

- Blueprint permissions (only if managed using IaC or GitOps)
- Actions
- Action permissions
- Automations
- Page permissions (only if managed using IaC or GitOps)
- Integration mappings
- Webhook mappings

Some of the resources will be migrated automatically, while others will require manual intervention.
To prepare for the migration, you can follow the steps described in the next section.

## Preparing for the migration
Before running the migration, you can check the affected resources and see if they need to be migrated manually.
To do this, you can use [this script](https://github.com/port-labs/script-examples/tree/main/users-and-teams-as-blueprints-migration-visibility-script) provided by us.
The script will retrieve all affected resources and generate a report with the resources that need to be migrated manually.
After downloading the script, follow the instructions in the README.md file to execute it.

:::info Security concerns
The script only queries the data from your portal, <b>it won't make any changes to your data</b>.
The code of the script is open source, and you can review it before running it in case of security concerns.
:::

> ### The migration changes report

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Migration report
```

> Once you run the script, you will get a report with the resources that will be affected by the migration.
> The report will be in the `index.html` file.<br/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running the script will output an `index.html` file that contains the report.  

```

> The report is divided into two main sections: resources that will be migrated automatically and resources that will require manual intervention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The report is divided into two main sections: resources that will be migrated **automatically** and resources that will require **manual intervention**.
```

> Each section contains the resources that will be affected by the migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Resources that will be migrated automatically
This section includes resources that will be migrated automatically once the migration is triggered.

#### Blueprints
<img src="/img/users-and-teams-migration/blueprints-to-be-migrated.png" border='1px' />
Blueprints will be migrated automatically. As described in the report, you can check which blueprints will be affected by the migration and what the changes will be.
The migration rules are:
1. Blueprints with entities that have `$team` value -> the ownership field will be set to `direct`.
```json
// Direct ownership
{
  "identifier": "PackageVersion",
  "title": "Package Version",
  "ownership": {
	  "type": "Direct"
  }
  ...
}
```
2. Blueprints with team inheritance defined -> the ownership field will be set to `inherited` and the team inheritance definitions will be removed.

> ```json

Reviewer 3: Change to "from this to this"

        "service": {
          "type": "string",
          "format": "entity",
          "blueprint": "Service",
          "description": "The service to create",
          "visible": {
            "jqQuery": ".user.team | contains([\"My Team\"])"
          }
        },
      }
  }
}
```
Will need to be changed to:
```json
{
  "userInputs": {
      "properties": {
        "service": {
          "type": "string",
          "format": "entity",
          "blueprint": "Service",
          "description": "The service to create",
          "visible": {
            "jqQuery": ".user.team | contains([\"my_team\"])"
          }
        },
      }
  }
}
```

This change will <b>not be applied automatically</b>, you will need to review the actions and apply the changes manually.

#### Automations
Automations might need to be reviewed if they:
1. Update or modify team relations in their mapping configurations
2. Use team-related fields in webhook bodies or URL parameters

For example, an automation that assigns users to teams might need to be updated if it's using the team relations field in its mapping:
```json
{
  "mapping": {
    "entity": {
      "identifier": ".identifier",

>       "team": ".relations.teams + [\"my_team\"] | unique"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      "relations": 
          "owner_team": ".relations.owner_team + [\"my_team\"] | unique"
```

Reviewer 3: Also add the "after" example.

                        }
                    ],
                    "combinator": "and"
                },
            },
            "conditions": [
                "(.results.executingUser.entities | first | .relations.teams) as $executerTeam | $executerTeam | contains([\"my_team\"])"
            ]
        }
    }
}
```

This change will <b>not be applied automatically</b>, you will need to review the actions and apply the changes manually.

#### Integration mappings
<img src="/img/users-and-teams-migration/integrations-to-be-reviewed.png" border='1px' />
Integration mappings ingesting data to the team meta property of entities will be affected. After the migration, the team meta property will expect team identifiers instead of titles, so the mapping for this value might break.
The script will report all integration mappings that ingest data to the team meta property.

For example the current integration mapping:
```yaml
port:
  entity:
    mappings:
          identifier: .name
          title: .name
          team: '"My Team"'
          blueprint: '"service"'
          properties:
            readme: file://README.md
            url: .html_url
            language: .language

> ```

Reviewer 3: Add "after" example

> Tries to map the 'My Team' value to the team meta property so it will need to be changed to the identifier.

Reviewer 3: Break line

#### Webhook mappings
<img src="/img/users-and-teams-migration/webhooks-to-be-reviewed.png" border='1px' />
Webhook changes are very similar to the integration mapping changes. The script will report all webhook mappings that ingest data to the team meta property.
This change will <b>not be applied automatically</b>. You will need to review the webhooks and apply the changes manually.

#### Pages
<img src="/img/users-and-teams-migration/pages-to-be-reviewed.png" border='1px' />
Page widgets might have configurations based on the teams relations old identifier that will be changed during the migration. These configurations might break and need to be reviewed. The script will report all pages that use the teams relations old identifier in their widget configurations.
The main use case for this is adding the relation identifier to the `excludedFields` property of a widget or in the `blueprintConfig` property. The blueprint config includes all filters, sorting, hidden and shown fields, and group-by fields of table widgets. If the old relation identifier is used in any of these properties, it will need to be changed to the new identifier.

> 

Reviewer 3: Break line
